Suppose, as suggested in the discussion of attachment, that shame and rage are both biologically programmed to signal threats to important relationships. Further, these emotions would be roused frequently in intimate relationships: one person is so dependent on the other that s/he frustrates us, leading to anger, and we feel criticized or rejected, leading to shame. Frequent episodes of shame and/or rage may be an inevitable part of all intimate relationships (150-151).

If these emotions are immediately acknowledged, as is sometimes the case, they may be quickly dispelled (Scheff 1979; Scheff and Bushnell 1984). Perhaps in early infancy, before strong social sanctions are applied by self or other, these emotions are frequently aroused but immediately expressed and dispelled. For adults, however, the case may be quite different. Especially in Western societies, these emotions are severely controlled. They may be acknowledged only under extremely restricted conditions, if at all. They are often seen as evidence of self- indulgence, weakness, or lack of self-control; they are taboo (Scheff 1984) (151).

Under these conditions, the affects of shame and rage lead a shadow life, expressed only indirectly. One channel, I will argue, involves idealization. An individual may deny his/her own shame by linking self with an idealized person or class of persons. Excessive patriotism may be seen as one route that idealization may take; snobbery attached to a person's lineage or social class is another. Idealization may also take a more personalized route, romantic infatuation with another person, or hero-worship (151).

In the blind nationalism/patriotism that rages throughout the world today, citizens subordinate their intelligence and conscience to their country or other group, ‘‘my country right or wrong’’ (see Scheff, 2006, ch. 11). In solidarity, each party recognizes the sovereignty of the other, but balances respect for the other’s position with respect for one’s own (582).

[Read chapter 11 of "Goffman Unbound"]